we were talking about previous planning
directors and the different contributions they
have made and in what ways they may have been unique
in contributing to planning in austin the next
planning director was mike mahoney and how would
you characterize his contributions or his
emphasis that impacted planning in austin well
actually he was here i think a good bit longer than
bill parker and i think that he actually saw the
department grow from just a few staff members to a
fairly sizable staff. A lot of the current mapping
that was started under Mike Mahoney, he
worked toward the first master plan that was
adopted by the city. The consultant, I believe,
was hired during his
So I think that he was very influential in getting
the first plan for Austin. And the next planning
director was? Oral Osborn. And his contributions
to the park and to the city as regards to planning?
Well, one thing I would say that it continued. The
plan, I think, was adopted, I believe, after Hoyle
took
Mike's place, if I have my dates right. And I think
that Hoyle, too, worked with neighborhoods. He
was very concerned about neighborhood
preservation.
He's very environmentally concerned. He has
always been interested in the protection of the
water system, the lake area, and the hill country.
So all in all, all our, I think, planning directors
have been really very dedicated in preserving
Austin. Can you give me an idea approximately when
Mr. Mahoney and Mr. Osborne began working as
director in the department? Well, Mr. Mahoney was
the director when I came to work in 1955. He was also
here in 54 when I worked part-time, when I worked
one summer. So I think that Mike might have been
here, he either came in 52 or 53, I believe. And I
believe that he left, oh, more than likely, close
to the 60s, or late 50s, and then while Osborne
became the director. And he was director until Mr.
Lilly came along, which was when? I can't, well, I
believe that Mr. Lilly has been director about
eight years. I'm not sure if it's 72 or in that
ballpark. And each planning director, of course,
has a different type of emphasis, different
fields of interest, and that impacts the fields of
planning within Austin. What would you say the
role of outside consultants has been in planning
in Austin? Have they been valuable? Yes, they have
been. Now, we had a consultant, of course, way back
in 1928, and I cannot give you how much influence
that consultant had. However, there were some
zoning categories that were developed as a result
of his plan, and I think that that does affect the
community. The next consultants that I'm aware of
would be the Farron Granger, And, of course, the
influence on the thoroughfare plan that was
adopted by the Council at that time. And then...
Approximately 61. No, that was in the 50s, early
50s. And the next one was specific planning and
research, or the Harold Wise Group out of
California. They changed title while they were
working for us. And they were the ones who were the
consultants for the plan that was adopted in 61.
The plan that was written by them was much more
comprehensive than the one that was adopted. And
you would say that even to this day, outside
consultants play a valuable role. Oh, yes. At this
time, how are they utilized? Well, at this time, we
have a consultant from California who is working
on the revision or the rewrite or new revision or
every way you might want to call it, zoning
ordinance. And so they are drawing, of course,
from their expertise and experience throughout
the country in regard to zoning, and I feel as
though that it will be quite influential, or they
will be quite influential on Austin if that
ordinance is adopted. Several types of factors
influence planning in the community, and I'd like
to go over some of these. What type of political
influences have impacted planning in Austin?
Well, that's, I think, one of the more difficult
questions that we have. We have the state capitol,
of course, here.
We are affected, I think, because the state
legislation takes place here. And I don't think
you can be completely immune from that. So even
though our local politics are separate, I think
there's a certain influence, even from the state
politics. Locally,
the political picture, I think, has changed in
recent years. It used to be where we had, I would
say, a fairly stable old school
political situation, where we had a lot of the
Alstonites
who were from old families who carried a lot of
influence on the entire political picture. I
don't know whether you recall Tom Miller, but he
was one of our most influential mayors, a very
strong mayor, a very dedicated person wanting
Austin to be as good as possible. He, I think, had
some far-reaching theories, just like he was the
one who influenced the acquisition of City Park
way out in the lake when he had a lot of opposition,
but he was a strong man and he accomplished it. That
was when approximately? Oh, goodness. I don't
know the year, but again, it was quite a number of
years ago. So I feel as though that we've had some
very strong political figures. The mayor who was
in office at the time that the 61 plan was adopted.
The 61 plan had been prepared and completed in 58,
and it had been more or less dormant because we had a
good bit of opposition to it. But at that time,
Lester Palmer was our mayor, and he felt very
strongly about it, and he knew that he was not going
to run for office again, and he decided that he
would He wanted, I think, to see the plan adopted.
And he made a special effort in working on it. And
even though it was
not as comprehensive as the original one had been
written, it was modified. And he helped with the
revision of it so that it was acceptable to the
political community, and we got it adopted. In
cities that utilize a city manager, occasionally
the city manager will have a good deal of influence
on planning. Has this been the case in Austin? Yes.
Actually, when I came, I think Walter C. Holm, I
believe, was city manager. And then Mr. W.T.
Williams came in, and he worked very closely with
us. He was a former city attorney. He, I think, had
been involved in writing of a number of the
ordinances, like involved in subdivision and
zoning.
actually kept his finger on the pulse of every part
of the community in Austin. In other words, he
wanted to know what was going on in every area. And
he was the type of person who never took a vacation.
I mean, his work, I think he loved his work. And I
think that for that reason, he wanted to know every
angle of it. I know that at the time that we were
working on Interstate 35. I was one of the new young
planners at that time and this was when Tom Miller
was in office and they wanted a model of what
interstate was going to look like. And here I was
fairly fresh out of the university and I got the job
to build it and Tom Miller always stayed
interested in it. And Mr. Williams, he would, I'd
be working late at night, Mr. Williams would come
up and, I mean, he had first-hand interest in
everything that was going on. I mean, he wanted
progress for the community, but again, he kept
posted on everything that was happening. And
let's say in the present, the present city manager
is... Dan Davidson. And what kind of influence has
he had on planning and the planning department in
Austin? Well, I think that he, too, is very
planning-oriented. In fact, I think some of his
background includes planning. And I think that
he, of course, wants the very best for Austin, and I
think he recognizes that one of the ways of
accomplishing the best for Austin is to have a
good, comprehensive plan that can be followed.
Would you say that religious factors have been a
significant influence on planning in Austin?
Maybe to a degree. We have several religious
schools here. We have St. Edward's. all Concordia
and the Presbyterian seminary and of course they
take out blocks of land that affect us physically
the tax base and the tax base so I think it has as far
as you know the religious community otherwise I
don't think that it has some in other words we do not
have
We're not made up of just basically one religion
that would more or less establish the rules for the
city. I think that we have enough variation here so
that I don't think that it's been a major
influencing factor. How have different ethnic
groups been an influence on planning throughout
the history of Austin?
I'm not sure whether they were involved a great
deal. I don't think that they were involved. They
have become involved in recent years. In fact, we
have quite a number of groups who are very vocal in
regard to the planning for Austin. There is a
tendency for some of them to want to do all of their
own planning. regardless of whether they own the
property or not. If they live in the area, they want
the full control of it. And I think that this is... I
have found that the minority groups are...
How can I put it? A small section of them are very,
very vocal and... do not want to compromise. I
think that's about the only way I can put it at this
time. I found that in other areas there's more of a
compromise and a let's work out the problem.
We've had a few instances recently where the
group, this is what we want, we won't take anything
else. And so I think that there can be some
instances where it can affect the community. Do
you see that in the planning department dealing
with minority groups through whether it be
independent or representing neighborhood
action-type groups, that they have their own
neighborhood concerns, typically, or they have a
comprehensive viewpoint and a large-scale view
of the city as an area? They do not take a
large-scale view, but very few neighborhoods do
this. I mean, I think that that's across the board.
Most of them, I think, take a very narrow view. One
of the things that I think, and I don't think this is
just in the ethnic groups, I don't think it deals
only with that. I think that any neighborhood
tends to focus in on their problems and how they are
affected. Now, one of the things that I have
noticed over and over again, and that is that if the
planning department or an outside agency
suggests something for the community, they're
immediately suspicious. They feel as though that
we're trying to do something to them, not for them.
And we had a case a number of years ago, and I think
this will illustrate it, where we were trying to
roll back a large area of East Austin from
industrial to residential, because the area was
developed residentially with small lots, and we
did not want industries to come in and disrupt the
neighborhood. We proposed it, and you just
wouldn't believe the opposition that we got. They
felt as though we were trying to take something
away from them. Last year, we had a group come in.
And it was more or less initiated by themselves for
a rollback.
The neighborhood leaders were supposed to have
met with everybody to try to inform them. But even
at that, we had a few people at the hearings who felt
as though somebody was trying to pull something.
They're immediately suspicious, even though we
have, say, the same concerns that they have, the
protection of the neighborhood. How have
geographic factors influenced planning in
Austin, centralized location, etc.? One thing,
we are on the edge of the hill country. So as you
know, part of our city is, part of our very best
development is in the hill country. what used to be
considered west of Austin. It's not west of Austin
anymore. It's part of Austin. And then, of course,
we have the farmlands east of Austin and south. So,
of course, you might be talking about the
geographic in the relationship that we're on
Interstate 35. where between, say, Houston and
Waco, I mean, San Antonio and Waco, if that's the
sort of thing that you're talking about, I think
that
being close to these other large cities is an
advantage. We're far enough away still. A lot of
people consider Austin a small town, which it
isn't anymore, but it still has a lot of... or
unique characteristics that the big cities of
Houston and Dallas don't have. And so I think that
being still close to these centers, because it
doesn't take long to get to Dallas or Houston, you
can fly there very, very quickly if you need to, but
still you can have a better place to live by being in
Austin. The other thing, when we're talking about
topography, geography, whatever way you want to
get into that, we have the variety that Houston and
Dallas don't have. San Antonio has some of it, but
again, I still think that Austin has the very best,
because it has a little of everything. How has this
played a role in, let's say, choosing Austin for
the capital site originally? Well, I think that
that is one reason it was chosen, is because it was
on the edge of the various areas. It's fairly
centrally located. Really, Austin is unique, and
I think our forefathers saw this. How about
waterways? Of course, the Colorado River had... I
think waterways have a major influence on the
settlement of any community, and I think the
Colorado River is our lifeline.
Sociological factors such as population,
education of the populace here... income levels
and that affected planning in Austin? Well, one
thing, because of the university being here,
because of San Marcos and Georgetown being close
by, they're smaller universities, I think that
our educational,
the availability of varying types of educational
levels, again, I've have not looked at the
figures, but I would dare say that the educational
level of Austinites tends to be a little higher in
most communities just because it's readily
available. And we have also some of the local
religious schools here. So we do have an influx of
some people who are going to the seminaries and so
on. How has this influenced planning? Has it been
an influence? I think it has been an influence. I
think that people in Austin, a lot of the people who
are interested in the betterment of the
community, the fact that they have been exposed to
it as they got their training at the universities,
as they participated in activities, they became
more knowledgeable. And I think that they have a
greater interest as a result in Austin being the
best possible place. So you feel possibly that
this has had an impact in citizen group
participation and organization. Oh yes, very
definitely. Directly as a result of these
factors.
Economic influences, we've spoken earlier, have
had an impact on planning. On the whole, how would
you characterize the importance of economic
factors here in planning?
I think that the fact that we have been fairly
stable up until just a couple years ago, Austin had
the reputation of never losing a bond election.
And suddenly we've lost a few. What was the first,
for example? Oh, goodness. It might have been two
or three years ago. Not very long ago. And I think
that before that, Austin was more of a close-knit
community. They did not have the outside influx at
that time as much, and they wanted the best for the
community, and they were willing to pay for it. Now
we've ended up with... more people from outside
and unfortunately a lot of them feel now that i'm
here i want to close the door i don't want any more
people to come it's nice as it is i don't want to mess
it up because we have kept our standards high
that's the reason it is as desirable as it is
problem that we're going to have is that as the city
grows there's more demand for services Your
efficiency, the larger you get, the more your
efficiency drops off. So per capita, I'm sure that
it's going to cost us more to operate the city and to
provide the services that people want, partly
because we are larger in the physical sense. We
have to extend our services further and further
out. and partly because the people are coming in
with suburban sprawl that we would like to
discourage but this is what the people want. They
do not want concentrations and so the services
continue to go up because they need to be extended
further and further and the very people who are
speaking against it are the ones who are moving
into these areas and I don't know how we can
settle that issue because in itself it is a
contradiction. But I think that all we can do is to
try to work with it, but it does affect the economic
capability of continuing to provide the services
that people want without increasing taxes. I see a
number of conflicts on the economic front. You
mentioned earlier that over 50% of the land area in
Austin cannot be taxed by the city of Austin. You
mentioned the desirability because of its
location next to the hill country, recreational
opportunities, influx of population would
naturally be occurring here because industries
are attracted to make up for that lack of tax base.
On the other hand, growth management has to be
considered and has been considered in the Austin
Tomorrow Plan. What are some of the other ways
historically that Austin has tried to deal with
this conflict through planning?
In regard to establishing
areas that We've tried to encourage the higher
intensity uses to happen on the major arterioles.
We have hoped that by encouraging the high
intensity uses that might be traffic generators
so that maybe a mass transit system can function.
And that goes back into our economics, because
right now, without government assistance, we
would be running at a tremendous deficit, I'm
sure. It's difficult to maintain the service and
still keep the prices down. But all of it goes back
into the fact that Austinites
moved here. because we have a lot of amenities. The
amenities cost money. And there is always kind of a
break point when people say that I can't afford
this anymore. But you get young families in, and
many times they do not see this correlation. And
when it comes right down to it, there are very few
people who have the
interest of the full community at heart unless it
affects them some way or benefits them in some way.
And you'll find that, for instance, people who
have a number of children in schools, they'll tend
to vote for the bond program for improvement in any
of the school system. You will find that because of
Austin now, we're ending up with a lot of retired
people who are empty nesters. They are on fixed
income. They don't use the streets very much. They
don't get out there during peak hours anymore.
They're set. They're not trying to move into
another home, out into another area or anything
like that. Any growth to them is... infringement
upon their right to privacy. That's right. And so
they, I think most of them, will tend to vote
against any improvements, either to the school
system, street system, or for any gross even if it
might be in what we call our selected growth
corridor, because they have really no interest in
it. All it will do is to possibly raise their taxes,
and they can't afford it. So because of, say, the
retirement situation, and, for instance,
universities, University has a tremendous
effect on this, too, because they can vote. And
most of those people, of course, a lot of them end up
staying here. I did. And I know of a lot of my friends
who did, because Austin is nice. But while they're
at the university, they look at the things in a very
theoretical sense. They don't realize the impact
on the entire community, what, say, a bond
election, how it might affect it if it's turned
down versus whether it's passed. So we can end up
with a lot of problems on the economic situation
because of our makeup of university, a lot of
retired people, military, the whole That was the
next factor I was going to ask you about, that of the
military influence on planning in Austin. Well,
one thing that I had not covered earlier, which I
should have, and that is the Bergstrom Air Force
Base has affected a lot of our planning, physical
planning, because of the sound and the noise
factors around Bergstrom Air Force Base. We're
recommending a lot of industrial development in
the area where we have noise problems. And so that
has affected our land use situation because some
of that area is not desirable for residential
because of noise or safety. I'm not sure I asked you
earlier, but when did Bergstrom get rid of it? I
can't tell you. I can't tell you offhand. Because I
would say that more than likely in the late...
thirties or early forties. And physical planning
was to the greatest extent impacted by them? Yes.
Now I can get that information for you if you'd like
to have that. We'll get that at a later time then.
Finally then, what would you, very briefly, could
you describe the current status of planning in
Austin? Well I think that we are Of course, I guess
you'd consider that we'd be blowing our own horn. I
think that Austin is about as advanced in regard to
planning as any community can be. We have, I think,
one of the most forward-looking planning
directors we've ever had. We consider the public
input from every group possible. We encourage
public input.
development community, investment community,
to work within the framework of the community.
Because they are going to be part of the community.
They will either provide jobs for the community or
provide a service to the community. And their
income will be based on the community's support.
We are one big family. And I think that we try to
encourage the people to work together. Because a
business locating in an area, they are not
isolated from the residential. Their service
area is the residential community. And so they
should complement, they should provide a
service, and that residential community should
feel good about that commercial area being there.
The same way about our transit system, same way
about our thoroughfare system. It is there.